My name is Robert Bowdidge.
I'm a member of the developer
tools team at Apple.
And I'd like to tell you about
a feature that the team I work
on has been involved with,
refactoring.
To give you an idea about what we're
going to be going through today,
we're first going to start off
explaining what refactoring is and
why you should be really excited that
you now have access to it in Xcode.
Second, we're going to give you
some demonstrations of what
refactoring in Xcode looks like,
so you can see how it works.
And finally,
we're going to give you some details
about how you can actually refactor your
own code and some of the things that you
should be aware of as you're doing so.
Now, before I start,
how many of you actually
know what refactoring is?
How many of you have used
refactoring for other languages?
refactoring for C-like languages?
Better than I thought.
Okay, what is refactoring?
For those of you who haven't seen it,
refactoring is a way to make global,
structured,
controlled changes to your source code.
By global,
that means that we actually have
ways that can go through your entire
program and change all of your
source code in some particular way.
By structural,
we mean that the changes involve
either your design or your
structure of your program,
what the names of things are,
what abstractions exist, and so on.
And they're controlled because a
refactoring tool gives you ways of
changing the code in ways that maintain
properties that you really want,
such as whether the code compiles
the same before as after,
as well as whether it runs
the same before as after.
And refactoring is really cool
because it gives you a way to
make your code more maintainable,
and it gives you a way to
make it easier to enhance your
programs to add new features.
Now, to give you some examples of that,
here's the most simple example that
most of you probably have seen before:
the idea of renaming a declaration.
So, let's imagine that you work for
a company that does car rentals.
And one day your boss comes in and says,
"Hey, I've got a great idea.
Let's rent trucks."
Now the problem is that you already
have this class called CarRental
that represents the rental record.
And the problem is that for anyone
else on the team who sees this,
they may think that this means only cars.
But when you go to trucks,
when you're renting cars and trucks,
does this class only apply to cars,
or does it apply to all the
vehicles that you're renting?
And so what you'd like to be able to
do is change that name and replace it
with a new name that's more meaningful.
And you'd like to make
sure that by doing so,
you're not breaking your code.
A slightly more complex example is
the idea of partitioning a class,
breaking it up into multiple classes.
So for example,
with this rental car example,
you could imagine the idea that
you have a car class representing
the cars that you're renting.
And there may be parts
of that that are generic,
that involve things like what the
mileage is and when the next repair is.
And there may be parts of the
class that are specific to cars,
such as how many seats it has,
and whether it's a convertible or not.
And so, if you were actually going to
add an enhancement to be able to
add the idea of renting trucks,
this model's not going to work,
because you already have the
car stuff embedded in there.
And what you'd instead like
is something like this,
where you break your car
class into two parts,
one being the vehicle generic behavior
and one being the car-specific behavior.
You make the vehicle class a superclass,
and then you subclass the vehicle
class to make your truck behavior,
and then you add your
truck behavior in there.
And this is how refactoring gives you a
way to make your code more maintainable,
by making it easy for you to do this.
Now people do this.
How many of you actually
have refactored by hand,
not with a tool?
It's like everyone.
I should just skip the intro,
but I'll go through it anyway,
just for practice.
And the reason why refactoring is hard
is because it's such a pain to do.
People will do this.
You can look at Fowler's book,
and he has all the examples
about how to actually do these
kinds of changes by hand.
To be able to refactor by hand,
you have to make sure the code compiles,
you have to make sure
it behaves the same,
and that means you actually
have to run your unit tests,
assuming you have those.
Then what you have to do is,
once you've figured
out how your code runs,
now you want to start making the change.
And one of the things you need to make
sure is that you understand what the
constraints are on the transformation.
What are the preconditions
that need to hold,
and what are the things that could
keep you from doing the transformation?
For example,
if you're renaming a declaration,
are there already declarations with
that name somewhere else in the program?
And you want to be able to check that,
so you have to go searching
through your code looking for that.
Then what you need to do, of course,
is you need to go to every
single place that could possibly
change in the source code.
And you need to look
at every single spot,
and you need to decide what
change needs to go there.
And you need to decide exactly whether
that change deserves to be there.
You need to make the change correct.
And that's really detailed,
and that's really nasty.
And in fact, I had a friend in graduate
school who tried something like
this with the Sun OS kernel.
He was adding some networking code.
And he had to go through every
line of the networking code,
and he had to figure out what was going
on with a particular buffer to figure
out how the behavior was going to change.
And he spent three days going
through all that source code.
Because he couldn't stop,
because he'd forget what
he'd been doing before,
and he didn't want to lose his place.
And that's why we need refactoring.
And finally,
once you've done your change,
you actually need to compile it and
test it and make sure it actually
behaves the same as you expected,
just to make sure you
haven't broken things.
Why should you have to do this?
Although we're programmers,
we can't read source code that well.
We can't look at 100,000 lines of source
code and remember all the details.
We can't make changes across a
million lines of source code easily.
But we've got tools that can.
We've got things like compilers.
We've got things like the IDE.
Xcode does code completion,
and it can read my source code.
So why can't it do the work for me?
And in fact,
I, as the programmer,
know what my design should be.
I should be able to say,
I want my program to look like this.
And the tools should be
able to do all the nasty,
dirty little details of
actually making those changes.
And as we've all seen,
as we've seen in this room,
there are these kind of
tools for other languages,
but in general these tools have not
been available for C-like languages,
or at least not broadly.
And so for me as an
Objective-C programmer,
and a C programmer,
I don't have access to these tools,
and many of you don't either.
So what we're here to tell
you about today is that Xcode
now has refactoring support.
And better than that,
we don't just have support
for changing source code,
but we also understand
the Apple environment.
And so that means that not
only are we going to modify
your Objective-C and C sources,
but we're also going to change
the non-source-style files
that exist in your programs.
For example, if you have an application
with a user interface,
you have nib files.
And nib files have mention
of interface variable names,
it has mention of classes.
And so if you were to rename a class,
you need to make sure you rename
the stuff in the nib file as well.
And we also have these
things like key-value coding,
where the name of a method
is related to the instance
variable that it manipulates.
And so if we change
the instance variable,
we need to change the method.
And finally,
we've added support for being
able to do some transformations to
move things into Objective-C 2.0,
so that you can actually start
moving over to the new language.
Now, the operations that you
can do on refactoring,
as most of you know,
are called transformations.
We call them transformations
because they're mathematical.
They're converting the program
from one form to another,
while maintaining all those properties
of keeping the code running the
same and compiling the same.
The transformations that we're
supporting in this first version
that's coming out with the
Leopard Preview are the following.
First of all, we have rename,
so that you can rename declarations.
Second, we have the idea of
manipulating class hierarchies,
so that you can create an abstract
superclass and start moving instance
variables and methods up into that.
Third, we have the idea of
encapsulating a variable.
Right now,
it's going to be fields of structures
or instance variables of classes.
And finally,
we have the transformations for
manipulating Objective-C 2.0 programs,
specifically modernizing iterations over
NSArrays to be using the new loop format,
as well as converting instance
variables into properties.
Now, to go into detail about
these transformations,
I'd like to bring Andrew Pontious up
on stage to demonstrate some of the
things that we're going to be doing.
Now, the operations that you
can do on refactoring,
are called transformations.
The first thing that you can
do is to create a variable.
The second thing that you can do
is to create to demonstrate these.
Thank you, Robert.
So as Robert said, there are four sets of
transformations in Xcode.
I'm going to start with rename.
Now, in order to have a project to use
to show you these transformations,
we're going to bring together
an application which stems
from the following problem.
Now, how many of you have had any trouble
this week finding the right room for
a session that you wanted to go to?
Okay, some of you.
Or maybe you know where the room is,
but you need to know how long
it's going to take for you to get
from where you are to that room,
so you don't miss any of the wonderful
content we have for you this week.
So, the problem is getting
to your conference room.
Now, there are plenty of resources out
on the web to help you get from,
say,
your hotel room to the conference center,
but once you get inside the building,
you're on your own.
So, the solution that you and your
buddy came up with was a new
application called Get a Room.
What?
OK, so the Getter Room application
consists of a variety of classes.
The first class represents the entire
structure that you're navigating through,
so that is the conference center class.
And then, because conference centers
consist of a number of floors,
there's also the floor class.
And then because floors
consist of a number of rooms,
there's also the room class.
And then,
to round out the list of classes,
they're the classes that have to do
with getting from one floor to another,
and these are the escalator floor,
excuse me, the escalator class,
the elevator class, and the stair class.
Okay, so in order to transform
any of these classes,
or anything in your project,
you need to follow these three steps.
First, you need to select the text that
represents what you wish to transform.
Second,
you need to preview the transformation
using the refactoring window in Xcode.
And third, you need to apply the
changes to your project.
So we're going to go
ahead and show you that.
So if we could switch
to the demo machine.
Okay, so now,
when your buddy saw the Get a
Room application that you had written,
your buddy noticed that all the logic
for getting from one room to another
was not just for conference centers.
It was also very general purpose for
any other structure that you were in,
for example, a museum or a skyscraper,
things like that.
So when you finally
marketed this application,
you made it a very general
purpose application,
and you got more sales because of it.
But you know that down
in the source code,
there's still a class
called Conference Center.
Now, this doesn't disrupt your code,
the first version of it.
Everything still compiles
and runs just fine.
But when someone else comes to the code
later on and wants to make new changes,
wants to add new features,
they might be a little confused
at the fact that the name
doesn't match its functionality.
So we're going to go ahead
and rename that class now.
OK, so we're going to follow
those three steps,
the first step being select the text.
In our case, we're selecting the class
name Conference Center.
The second step was to bring
up the refactoring window.
There are actually four ways to
bring up the refactoring window.
The first way is through the Edit menu.
There's a Refactor menu item there.
The second way is to use
the keystroke shortcut,
Command-Shift-J.
That's probably the fastest way.
The third way involves clicking on the
refactoring icon in your icon toolbar.
Now, by default, there's actually no
refactoring icon there,
so in order to add it,
you need to customize your toolbar.
and add up that icon to your toolbar,
then you're all set.
Now, the fourth way is just to bring up
the contextual menu of your selection.
And again,
there's a refactor menu item there.
So OK, we're going to pick away,
and we're going to bring
up the refactor window.
Okay, now as you can see,
the UI there combines to form a
sort of sentence that describes
what you're going to do.
In our case, we are renaming
Conference Center to a new name.
So this new name, we need to type it in,
and in our case we're going to use
"building" because that's a more
general purpose name for the class.
Now, as you can see,
there's a few other pieces of UI here
that we'll get to in a little bit.
There's the Related KVC Members checkbox.
There's also a Snapshot checkbox.
Now, we'll get to the Snapshot
checkbox at the very end.
So right now,
we can click the Preview button.
Okay, now as you saw,
there was a little bit of activity going
on there in the refactoring window.
That activity shows you that we
are in the middle of setting up,
putting together that preview for you.
So now the result here is there
are several classes which have
checkboxes next to their name,
and a tally of the number of
changes that are being made to
those files on the right-hand side.
So that's a good overview
of what we've done,
but if you want to see more details,
you need to select one of those files.
So as you can see,
selecting the file brings up a view
that shows you what the changes
are that we're going to make.
In this case,
we're changing the class declaration
name from Conference Center to Building.
If we go to the .m file,
You can see we're also changing
the class definition name.
And if you go to the third file,
you can see that we're also changing
a usage of the Conference Center class
name to the new name.
So that all looks good.
Let's apply those changes.
Now,
if we go back to the project window here,
you'll see that the number of files
that show as being edited are the
same files that we showed as having
changes in the refactoring window.
What we've done is we've applied these
changes by editing those files for you.
Okay,
so that was our first transformation.
If we could go back to the slide machine.
Okay, so now that we've gone through our
very first transformation in Xcode,
I'd like to go through the
features of the refactoring
window in a little more detail.
So the refactoring window
consists of three areas:
the setup area, the results area,
and the comparison area at the bottom.
The setup area comes up first, and again,
as I said,
the UI there shows you a bit of a
sentence to describe what's going on.
In our case,
rename Conference Center to the new name.
Now, while rename is the
default transformation
that comes up in this area,
you can also bring up all the other
transformations that are possible.
Now, this pop-up button menu shows
you all of the transformations,
but only the transformations that
are valid for your current selection
will actually be active and be
something that you can select.
So now, if we hit the preview button,
as I said before,
now the results area comes up.
Now, the files in the results area
have different state depending
on what's going on with them.
If they are inactive,
that means that we haven't quite
gotten to them yet in the preview.
If they're active but have a little
progress indicator next to them,
that means that we are in the process
of analyzing that file right then.
And if there are checkboxes next to them,
that means we are done analyzing them,
and we know what kind of
changes we want to make to them.
So again,
if you select one of these files,
then the final area comes up,
which is the comparison area.
Now,
you might notice that this comparison
area looks a lot like another application
that most of you have probably used,
which is file merge, right?
So there are, of course,
similarities and differences
between file merge and this area.
One of the differences is that
this area is coordinated with
the file row in the results area.
So you see that there's a
checkbox there in the file.
That means that all of the changes
that by default will be made for this
transformation are going to be made.
And you can see this as well because the
arrows all point from... Left to right.
Now, if you say, OK,
for this particular file,
I've decided that I don't want
to make any of those changes,
you can uncheck that checkbox.
And now, all of the arrows have switched
for pointing from left to
right to right to left.
And this also shows one of
the other differences between
this area and File Merge,
which is, in File Merge,
when you want to see the
results of the choices you've
made for a particular merge,
you have to look at the bottom pane,
the third pane of a File Merge window.
But in our case,
we only have the two panes.
So we show the results of the choices
that you made only in the right pane.
So if you say, OK,
I don't want to make any changes,
now all of those changes disappear
from the right-hand side.
But if you come back and you say, OK,
well,
maybe I want to make that first change,
what you do is you select that row and
you flip the arrow using the arrow keys,
the same way you would do in File Merge.
And now that one change is made.
Now again,
we have synchronized with that checkbox.
So the checkbox now,
instead of showing unchecked,
now shows mixed.
Some changes have been made.
Some changes haven't.
So if you go ahead and say, OK,
now I'm going to make that
second change as well,
now all the arrows point to the right,
and the checkbox is fully checked.
OK, so we've had a bit of a
look at the refactor window.
There is, in fact,
still more to look at in the rename demo.
So if we could go back to that demo.
Okay,
so for our second shot here at Rename,
we're going to go to the Room class.
We bring up room.h.
And one of the instance
variables here is called picture.
Now, if we look at a sample
picture in this project,
You can see that in fact,
it isn't really a photo.
It's more like a map or a floor plan.
So in the same way that the
Conference Center class name was a bit
misaligned with the actual functionality,
this instance variable is also
not quite named correctly.
So we're going to change it.
So we can go through those steps again.
First, we need to select the text.
Next, we need to bring up
the refactoring window.
Now, as you can see here,
that checkbox that
I told you about before,
the related KVC members checkbox,
is now active.
And it's active because you have selected
an Objective-C class instance variable.
So let's go ahead and check that.
And so again,
we're saying rename picture2,
and we need a new name.
In our case,
we're going to call it floorplan.
All right,
so we can go ahead and preview this.
Wow, so, okay, so again we see that, hey,
what's going on?
There's a nib file in the results.
So when we did the first transformation,
only source code files showed up there.
But now, a nib file shows up,
so what's going on?
Well, you've probably already seen
this a lot in your own code,
that whenever you change
instance variable names in
classes that you're working on,
that doesn't change them in the
nib files if those classes are
referred to in any nib files.
So what you need to do is you
need to find those nib files and
either drag the header over again
and reconnect everything up,
or you type in a new name.
You have to do this for every nib file.
It's error-prone, it's tedious,
and with refactoring,
you don't have to do that anymore.
So let's have a look at the room.
that name file.
Okay, as you can see here,
we've gone ahead and
made that change for you.
We've changed the picture
outlet to floor plan.
And that outlet is still connected,
everything will still work
properly for your code.
Yeah.
We think it's pretty neat too.
But we're still not done.
So if we go to the room.m file,
Yep.
You'll see that we are changing the
instance variable picture to floor plan,
but we're also changing a couple
of other things in this file.
We're also changing some method names.
In this case,
the picture and set picture method names.
So why are we doing that?
We're doing that because we checked
that related KVC members checkbox.
Now, KVC stands for key value coding.
This is a way to refer to the data in
your class instead of directly by methods
by using string-based keys and key paths.
So how this works is there are
also methods that are related to
those keys by various patterns.
The patterns here are there's
a getter and setter pattern.
And so, again, the getter is very simple.
It's just picture,
and the setter is set picture.
Now, there are plenty of other more
complicated patterns for methods
related to particular key names.
They especially come up
with too many relationships.
We're not going to be
showing those today.
But you can see that we have changed all
of the places in this particular file.
particular file that
are related by a KPC.
Right?
So we can go ahead and
commit these changes,
apply these changes as well.
All right.
So we can go back to the demo machine.
Actually, the slide machine.
All right.
So the next set of transformations
I'll be going over today have
to do with class hierarchy.
So what we've been doing so far is
only changing individual classes.
However, sometimes you also want to
change a series of classes,
classes that are related by
class hierarchy or should be.
And the classes that fit that bill in the
get a room application are the escalator,
elevator, and stairs classes.
Now, if we look at a snippet from a
class model that was generated
by the get a room project,
we can see that, in fact,
they all have exactly the same content.
They all have a name, instance variable,
and they all have a duration in
seconds from floor to floor method.
Now, again,
this is all fine in your code.
It will all work properly.
However, when someone comes in
later to maintain the code,
to fix bugs, or to add new features,
what they're going to find
is if they want to add new
features to one of these classes,
they have to add it to all three if they
want to make them all work the same way.
And it's very easy for the
functionality of these classes
to diverge slightly over time,
for bugs to be introduced in one
place and not in another place.
It can get to be a real mess.
So the way you want to get around
that is to take all of the shared
code from these three classes and
abstract it out to a single superclass.
And that is what we're going
to do for you right now.
So if we can go back to the demo machine.
So at this point, we're going to be doing
a little bit of a demo.
Let's go to the stairs class, stairs.h.
Okay, and again,
we need to follow our steps.
We're going to select the thing
that we wish to transform,
in our case, the stairs class.
and bring up the
refactoring window again.
But in this case, we're not going to use
the Rename transformation.
We're going to switch to another one,
which will be the
CreateSuperclass transformation.
Now again, as before, there's a kind of a
sentence going on here.
Create superclass of stairs named a
new name that you have to type in.
In our case,
we'll call that new class floor changer,
I guess.
That's not really a great name,
but it's all I can
come up with right now.
However, if I come up with a
really great name later,
you can use the rename transformation
to rename it to that better name.
So we can go ahead and
apply the changes here.
So as you can see,
we've made changes to two files here.
If we go to the .h file,
you can see that we have created
a new decoration for the floor
changer class in the same file as
the decoration of the stairs class.
And if you go to the .m file,
you can see that we've created a new
definition of the floor changer class in
the same file as the stairs definition.
So, okay, we can go ahead and apply that.
As you can see, right now,
the floor changer class is empty,
and that's not what we want.
So what we need to do now is
move up some of the content
from stairs to floor changer.
Now, actually,
the first thing we want to do
here is a bit of housekeeping.
So what we need to do is we actually need
to save these files before we continue.
Now, why do we need to do that?
This is because the refactoring
functionality in Xcode relies
on the Xcode project instance.
So we need to save the index
for some of its functionality.
And currently,
the index requires that files be
saved before their new contents are
re-indexed for us to know about.
So this means that because
the floor changer is only
in files which are unsaved,
that means the indexer
doesn't know about it,
and we need the index to
know about this new class.
So we're going to go ahead
and save these files,
and then we can continue.
So now we're going to select
the name instance variable,
and again,
bring up the refactoring window.
And this time we're going to switch
to the move up transformation.
Now, as you can see here, again,
there's a sentence,
move up name to class for changer.
But in this case,
we already know everything we need to
know to make the transformation work.
And that means that you don't have
to type anything new in yourself.
All you need to do is
click that preview button,
which we will do now.
Now, one of the things you saw there very
briefly was that for just a second,
there were a lot of
extra files in that list.
And they were all system
header files for the most part.
So what happens is,
when we come up with that initial list
of files to look into to see if we
need to make changes to these files,
what we're doing is we're
just very simply asking,
who knows about something called name?
And of course, name is a very common,
well, name.
That means that there are a
lot of false positives there.
But we know enough to disallow these
files very quickly from the results,
and only narrow down to exactly
the files and the classes that
we actually want to change.
In this case, the stairs class.
So here we go.
We'll hit the header here.
Okay.
So here, as you can see...
Okay, yeah, okay.
All right, well, okay.
So a little bit of a glitch there,
but as you can see,
what happened was we moved up the name
declaration from stairs to floor changer.
Very simple.
So now we're going to do
that again with the method.
But as you can see,
in the duration in seconds
from floor to floor...
Okay, so in this case, however,
we have a method name which is actually
broken out over several parameter names.
So we can't just select the entire
name in one contiguous selection.
But all we really need to do here is
actually select a portion of the name,
and as we bring up the
refactoring window,
and switch to move up,
You'll see that in fact we have the
entire name correctly listed there.
We can operate on partial selections.
That can be very useful to you.
So, we're all set.
We can hit the preview
button here as well.
Now, if you look at these files again,
in the .h file and the .m file,
you can see that, again,
we've moved things up from stairs
to the four changer clouds.
If we actually look at the .m file,
Here it actually looks,
here the method is long enough that
actually the diffing engine that
we're using treats that as something
that's pinned and everything else
as something that's moved around.
But it still is all,
all the changes have been made correctly,
so we can go ahead and
apply these changes.
So that is, oh actually,
so we've done some of
the work here for you.
However, the transformations
can't do all of the work.
In fact, you still need to either delete
or merge in yourself all of the
methods from the other classes,
escalator and elevator.
And you also need to, by hand,
connect those classes up
to their new superclass,
4changer.
So we can't do everything for you here,
but we can automate some of the work,
which again should make
your life a lot easier.
Okay, so go back to the swipe machine.
So we're going to go to
the third transformation,
which is encapsulate.
Now what we've seen so far is that
we've been working on the classes
of the Getter Room application.
But there are some places in
this code where you decided when
you were writing the code that
it didn't need a full class.
Some of this logic was simple enough
that all you really needed was a very
simple structure to make that work,
a C structure.
One of these places was
the TransitInfo structure.
Now what this structure does is it's a
place to add up all of the information
from the individual steps of the transit,
of the progress you need to make
to get from one place to another,
so that you can have it all
aggregated together somewhere.
So, but what has happened then,
again in version 2,
in version 1 this was fine.
In version 2,
what you found is that you need to do
more complex logic with this structure.
You may need to calculate a
variety of different routes
according to certain criteria,
like I want to be able to get
the most exercise from my trip,
so I want to go by the
stairs as much as possible.
Or I want a wheelchair accessible route,
which would use only the elevator.
So a simple structure
is no longer required.
However, if you need to add all of this
custom logic to your application
everywhere where these structured
fields are accessed directly,
that's going to be a nightmare.
So what you really need to do is
abstract out that logic into one place,
where then you can make these extra
changes that you want to make.
So, we're going to show you
how to do that right now.
So again, one more time,
back to the demo machine.
Okay, so if we go to the
transitinfo.h header file,
we can see the decoration
of our structure.
Now, unfortunately,
in this preview version of Xcode,
we can't initiate a transformation from
this particular header file because of a
glitch that has to do with if structures
are only referred to by a .m file.
So we can't do that right now.
But what we can do is we can go to
one of the usages of the structure and
initiate the transformation from there.
So we'll go to the
conference-center.m file.
And if you go to the very bottom--
We can see that the duration in
seconds field is being used here.
Now, it's being used in two ways.
We are setting its value,
and then we are also getting
its value in order to calculate
the new value to set it to.
So, let's get started with
the transformation.
We select duration in seconds,
bring up the refactoring window,
and switch to the
encapsulate transformation.
and here the sentence is:
"Encapsulate duration in seconds,
setter and getter."
So in this case,
because we're dealing with
C structures instead of with instance
variables in an Objective-C class,
since there's no class,
we can't actually make methods here.
So what we're actually going to
do is we're going to make C global
functions for the setter and getters.
So if we go ahead and preview this--
OK, and we look at the .m file here.
OK, this is a bit of a glitch here,
but we can look at the
comparison area at first.
So as you can see,
the places where we're setting the
value of the field have been replaced
by an invocation of the setter function,
and the places where we're getting
the value have been replaced by
invocations of the getter function.
We've also added the--
[Transcript missing]
Quit Xcode and Try Again.
So that may happen sometimes
in your own usage of the
refactoring feature in Xcode.
If this happens,
just close the project and
reopen it and try again,
and it should work then.
Okay, there you can see the changes.
If we go to the .h file,
you can very quickly see
the function decoration.
Everything looks good,
so we're going to apply those changes.
Great.
So back to the slide machine.
Okay?
So the fourth set of transformations
I'm going to show you today
have to do with Objective-C 2.0.
And the two things that we can do for
you are to modernize your loops and to
convert to using properties in your code.
So for modernizing loops,
as you can see from
the code snippet here,
we do two things.
We erase all of the working
variables that are no longer needed.
And we also changed the loop
statement to use the for-in syntax.
Now, that for-in syntax can be optimized
a little better by the compiler,
so you get faster code,
and you also get more streamlined code,
because we've taken out a
bit of extra work there.
So one thing to note about what we do
here for you is we will only change
loops which have to do with iterating
over an NSSet or an NSMutableSet or
an NSArray or an NSMutableArray.
We will only convert things
which go a very straightforward
way through the array or set.
If you go backwards, if you do any other
sort of special logic,
what we do is we play it safe,
because we want to have that
guarantee that we are not going to
change the meaning of your code.
So if we see anything we can't do,
we just leave it alone.
But for the ones which are safe,
we go ahead and translate this for you.
So for using properties,
what we do is we add a property
decoration to your classes that refers to
existing instance variables in the class.
Here we're adding a
decoration for myString.
And so these are very neat
features in Objective-C 2.0.
We're not going to have time
to explain them here today,
but go ahead and look
at the documentation on
Objective-C 2.0 yourselves,
and you'll find out cool it is.
So now we're going to demo this.
Now, there is a transformation for
changing one loop at a time.
And like the other transformations,
it involves you selecting something
and bringing up the window.
But for these particular conversions,
there's also another way to
get going for your project.
And that is by looking at the
Edit menu and selecting the Convert
to Objective-C 2.0 menu item.
Now, why is this a separate menu item?
This is separate because,
unlike the other times when you
need a valid selection to get going,
this is project-wide.
As long as your project is open,
as long as you're not indexing,
this will be active.
So we can see in this window
that there are the two checkboxes
for the two possibilities.
We're going to go ahead and check both
of those and get going with the preview.
Now, why is the UseProperties
checkbox not checked by default?
This is because UseProperties is
a bit more experimental than the
Modernize Loops functionality.
There may be times when you apply this
to your code where there are some places,
unfortunately,
where the additions that we're
putting into your code don't compile.
So you'll need to take those
back out manually yourself,
and then you'll be okay.
But we figured that the times where
the additions are correct certainly
outnumber the times where they aren't,
so we think we're still
saving you some effort there.
But again, just so you know,
it's a bit more experimental.
So as you can see the results here,
you can go to conferencecenter.m,
the very first file.
And you'll see that the first change
that we made is to modernize a group.
In this case,
we've actually modernized a group
which is using the NSEnumerator class.
So now if we go to the second file,
you'll see that in this file,
we've added a property.
And in this case,
this property decoration is also
referring to a getter method as well.
Again,
there's a lot of neat functionality here,
so I urge you to look
at the documentation.
Alright, so that looks good,
so we're going to apply
these changes as well.
And we're done.
Go back to slides.
Go back to the slide machine.
So, in this very brief amount of time,
I made a lot of changes to this project.
What happens if I say,
after I've done all these changes,
"Oh no, I screwed up.
I shouldn't have made all these changes.
Maybe we're shipping tomorrow,
maybe we're going in an
entirely different direction.
I need to get my code back to the place
that it was in before I started." Now,
if I had made changes
to individual files,
that would be fine.
I'd just hit Command-Z and
I would undo those changes.
But once you get into
large-scale changes,
hundreds of files even,
that becomes a lot harder.
You need to go to each file and
hit Command-Z for each one of them.
And of course, for nibs,
you don't even have that possibility,
because when we make changes
to nib files in refactoring,
there's no undo stack.
We're changing the nib
files directly on disk.
So you can't undo them.
So Xcode can now make
these mass changes for you.
We need a way to roll those changes back.
And the way that we allow you to do
that is a feature that was already
announced this week on Monday:
snapshots.
Now,
snapshots are not just for refactoring.
They're for any time when you're
making large-scale changes or
checkpointing certain places in your
code before you go and do something new.
and SnapShots are project-wide,
unlike the stacks for
individual text files.
And unlike Undo, which happens sort of in
the background silently,
without you needing to do
anything or see anything,
we have UI to let you see what snapshots
you've taken and what they look like.
So I'm going to show
that to you right now.
So one of the things that I pointed out
before was how there was this snapshot
checkbox in the UI for refactoring.
And we checked that,
and we checked that for all of
the refactorings that we did.
So what that means is we have now
taken a snapshot for each point
where we did a transformation.
So we can have a look at that by
bringing up the Snapshots window,
which is available under the Edit menu.
So as you can see,
there are now snapshots with names
which should look familiar to you.
Before Rename Conference Center,
Before Move Up,
we've given them these default names,
which should be very easy for
you to spot what's going on.
So now, if we have a look at the very
first snapshot that we took...
You will see that we list all of the
files that are different in the snapshot
from the current state of your project.
So we can have a look.
Let's say, look at the room.h file.
So this file now has the aggregate of
all the changes we've made to it in all
of the refactorings we've done so far.
We have changed the picture
instance variable to floor plan,
and we've also added
a property decoration.
So OK, so this looks good.
So let's restore to this snapshot.
Now, as you can see,
there's that little progress
dialogue that shows up.
And that dialogue showed up every
time we did a transformation as well.
And that dialogue shows that
we are taking a snapshot.
We're just restoring a snapshot,
so what's going on?
In fact,
we actually take a new snapshot every
time you restore from an old snapshot.
So it's actually a
little hard to describe.
But in any case,
what we do is we make it easier for you,
every time you do something large-scale,
to go back to the way it was before.
And what we're trying to do here is to
make your coding a bit more fearless.
You can make large-scale changes,
they're going to be more safe than ever,
and you know that you can always fall
back to what we were doing before.
So go back to the slides, please.
And so that's it for the demos
that I'm going to show you today.
Now I will pass it back over to Robert,
where he will talk about
hints for using refactoring.
Thank you.
Okay.
So at this point,
you have seen or you have
heard what refactoring is,
which most of you
actually knew what it was.
I was very impressed.
You've also seen how
refactoring looks in Xcode,
and you've seen how you would use it.
What I'd like to do now is tell you
a little about what issues you may
encounter as you are actually using this,
some of the things to keep in mind,
some of the things to be aware of,
and so on.
Now, before that,
one of the things that hopefully
all of you were thinking about
as you saw this example is,
that was nice, but that seemed like a
relatively small example.
I wonder how it works on
my 250,000 lines of code.
Actually, how many people asked that?
Oh, I won't bring it up.
One of the fun things
with refactoring is that,
you know, you're actually doing
things like parsing code,
and so it takes a while.
And so one of the big issues is,
how is this going to work?
I want to be able to use this on my code.
I've got a project with, you know,
100,000 lines of code,
250,000 lines of code.
Can I actually use it?
And the answer is yes.
In general,
the amount of time it takes to do a
refactoring will be proportional to the
number of files that we need to parse.
So the kind of times I see on
typical machines in my office
is to parse a single file,
it usually takes about 10 seconds.
Now, you may be saying,
why does it take 10
seconds to parse a file?
But the reason is that when
you parse that first file,
that's when we actually
parse the system headers.
And so when you're including
Cocoa slash Cocoa.h,
that means you're including 100,000
lines of headers at that point.
And that 10 seconds is from the
point where you start bringing
up the refactoring menu,
not when you hit the preview button.
If you have about 36...
In about 26... In 20 seconds,
we can parse about 36 files.
In about a minute,
we can parse 100 files.
And so that should give you an idea
of how long refactoring might take.
Now, this doesn't mean that if
your project is 100 files,
it's always going to take a minute.
We only parse the files
that we think are necessary.
As Andrew mentioned,
what we do is we actually look
at the names that are used in
a given file to find out which
files might be interesting.
And we only parse those particular files.
Now, a second thing that you did
not see in the example-- well,
actually,
you did if you were very careful
about spotting things-- was the idea
of what happens when you have errors.
All of the transformations we
did didn't have any errors,
but what happens when that does happen?
Now, errors are really important,
because part of the reason why
you're going through all this work
of doing refactoring is because
you want the tools to tell you,
hey, that's not a really good idea.
You don't want to do that.
And so what the refactoring
feature of Xcode will do
depends on how bad the error is.
So, for example, if it's a problem where
we just simply say,
we can't do this.
For example, you're making changes where
we're going to have to make a
lot of changes inside macros,
or, for example,
on a rename like this one here,
you're trying to rename a
class called SKT Graphic and
convert it to SKT Graphic View,
which already exists.
We need to tell you, no,
we can't do this.
And so what you'll see is
you'll have a dialog box,
a sheet come down,
and it will actually say, no,
we can't do it for this reason.
Now there's also errors that only
occur on certain points where
we can do the transformation,
but there's a certain number
of places where we can't.
So this example here is
from doing an encapsulate.
So we were trying to hide a
particular field of structure,
the left call structure on the left.
And what happens is that
if you look really closely,
that field isn't being read or written,
it's being incremented.
And we can't do an
increment with just a get.
We can't do it with
just a setter function.
And so we have to say, hey,
you need to look at this.
We're not sure what to do.
And so you as the programmer,
when you get one of these, can decide,
OK, do I want to make a third function
that wraps this variable that's
going to be an increment function?
Do I want to get the
value and then set it?
Or do I just want to give up on this
transformation because I realize this is
a little more complex than I imagined?
These are the two types of errors
you're going to see and the two
ways that you can recover from them.
And now a couple practical
tips that Andrew brought up.
Now,
one of the things to keep in mind is that
refactoring changes your source code.
It changes a lot of your source code.
It can change all the
files in your project.
And because your source
code is your work product,
because it is the thing of value,
you want to be really careful with it.
We can make insane amounts of
changes to your source code,
and you may find out after
you've done several refactorings,
either that the direction that the
refactorings are going isn't correct,
or that you're not doing the right thing.
Or that perhaps you're not going
to be able to do the transformation
you want because the last one
can't actually be done correctly,
or you realize at the end, no,
that's not what I really wanted to do.
You need to be able to save
your source code so that you
can back off in those cases,
because that does happen
in real refactoring.
And so in those cases,
you need to make sure you're either
saving the files off on the side,
you're using the snapshot feature,
you're using a source
code control system.
Whatever it is, please make sure to
save your source code.
We don't want to have changed your source
code in ways that you don't want anymore.
Another thing to keep in mind is
that part of the fun of refactoring,
part of the thing that makes it so hard,
is that we actually have
to parse your source code.
We have to act like a compiler
to be able to understand it.
And that's how refactoring is able to
do the precise changes it needs to do.
And as a result,
if your code doesn't parse,
if it's not syntactically valid code,
we aren't going to be able to
do the analysis that we want.
Now, we don't restrict you.
We don't say, "Hey,
you've got some warnings in your code.
We're not going to let you refactor."
But we're going to let you
actually do the refactorings.
But if your code doesn't parse,
we may not make all the
changes that are appropriate.
So if you know that your program is in an
incomplete state and you do refactorings,
be a little more careful about
checking to make sure the
changes are what were intended.
For example,
you might have cases where changes after
a syntax error don't actually get made.
Okay,
now this is also the first time that
we've shipped refactoring with Xcode.
So in the, in Leopard Preview, it's,
it's our first version.
There's going to be some
issues to keep in mind.
One of the caveats that you should
keep in mind is that this only works
for C and Objective-C right now.
So as long as you're,
so you can refactor to your heart's
delight in code that's completely C,
Objective-C.
If you have Objective-C++
or C++ in your code,
that means that you can't start
refactoring from those files.
Now, you can actually have a case
where you've got a class that's
defined in an Objective-C file or
in an Objective-C header that's
used in the Objective-C++ files.
You can start a refactoring like that.
We're not going to tell you
where those changes are.
You're going to actually have,
if there's changes in
the Objective-C++ files,
you're going to have to search
them on your own using the good
old-fashioned approaches of text search.
And hopefully that will remind you of
what life was like before refactoring.
But that's how it is.
Another thing to keep in mind is
that many people try to move to
Objective-C++ or try to work with C++
by turning all their Objective-C files
into Objective-C++ files,
into .mm files.
And if they do this,
it has the advantage that you don't have
to worry about when you're including
C++ headers and when you're not.
If you're doing that,
you might actually need to back off a
little and convert some of your files
back to being straight Objective-C and
only including C and Objective-C headers,
so that you can actually refactor those.
Now,
one of the things that makes C such an
interesting language is we've got this
cool thing called the C preprocessor.
And the C preprocessor is fun because
it's this own little language,
and it has the ability to do
arbitrary text substitution,
it allows you to do
conditional compilation,
it allows you to do really clever things.
And unfortunately,
it makes life absolutely miserable for
anybody who's doing source code analysis.
So for this first version of refactoring,
the way that we're going to handle the
preprocessor is that we are only going to
handle the current build configuration.
That is, you're building development
or you're building deployment.
Whatever would compile as part of
that build configuration is what
code we are willing to change.
You can find your build configuration
either from the project menu or
in the figure you can see on the
screen here up in your toolbar.
So for example,
with the code you see here,
we have a variable
called dailyRentalRate.
And if you decide to rename that,
we're certainly going to
change the occurrence on the
first line and the last line.
However, that occurrence in the middle is
used inside of a if-deft code,
inside conditional code,
where we only compile that
if the debug macro is set.
The only time we're going to
change that occurrence that's in
yellow is if the debug macro was
set in the build configuration
that you're currently using.
So make sure that when
you do refactoring,
you're using the build configuration
that's it's going to include the
code that you most want to refactor.
Another caveat to keep in mind
is that we're currently only
going to work on single projects.
So for example,
if you have your application
broken into multiple projects,
you have one for your frameworks
and one for your applications,
we are only going to change
things in one project.
So for example, in this case here,
if you want to rename the class foo,
you're
We're certainly going to change the two
occurrences in the My Framework class,
if that's where you're
doing the refactoring from.
However,
we're not necessarily going to change
the occurrence in the MyApp project.
So if you want to change
the stuff in other projects,
then you either need to go and
do that by hand using regular
text search and replace.
Another thing you can try is
doing this with refactoring.
Now, we do have a little restriction
on the transformations right now.
In general, we try not to allow you to do
refactorings if you're changing something
where you don't own the declaration,
where it's not defined
in your current project.
So for example,
we don't let you rename NSArray because
we can't change foundation.
And so for the example of Foo,
if you tried to rename Foo
in the MyApp project here,
we wouldn't actually let you change it,
because we'd say, hey,
we don't know what Foo is,
we don't know where it is,
we can't change the name.
If you run into this case,
one workaround that you can do is you
can actually create a temporary dummy
definition somewhere in that project,
rename it,
then pull out the dummy definition.
Now, a couple other minor issues
you should keep in mind.
We don't allow you to actually
rename-- if you decide to
rename-- let's start again.
Many Objective-C programmers like
the idea to make sure that the
name of the file that a class is
defined in matches the class name.
If you're one of those people,
then you're going to find
that when you rename a class,
we don't necessarily
rename the file name yet.
So that's something to keep in mind.
Another thing to keep in mind is
that we don't rename comments.
So if you change the
name of a declaration,
you're going to have to go through,
and if there's places in your
comments where you want the
name to be changed as well,
go through and do those by hand.
And finally, for this first version,
we're not allowing you to do things
like rename macros or protocols
or categories or properties.
So what you've heard now is you've
understood what refactoring is,
you've seen how we do
refactoring in Xcode,
and you've heard some of the details
about how to make refactoring work for
your own programs when you're doing it.
As you've heard,
refactoring is a way to make global,
structured,
controlled changes to your program.
And refactoring makes sure that the code
should compile the same before as after,
and it should have the
same output behavior.
It should run the same before as after.
And the refactoring feature allows
you to have a better time doing
maintenance and enhancement style
changes to your source code.
This is the first version.
We hope to continue improving it.
We also hope that this will be a
base for other tools in Xcode that
manipulate source code or do analysis.
We're looking forward to
hearing what you think of this.
We're looking forward to hearing what
you like about the refactoring feature,
what you don't like about
the refactoring feature,
what you'd like us to do.
Please file bugs.
Please send feedback.
We would love to hear about it.
And we hope you enjoy the feature.
With that, I'd like to bring Matt Formica
on to close the session.